In 602, Maurice, with the lack of money as always dictating policy, decreed that the army should stay for winter beyond the Danube. The exhausted troops mutinied against the emperor. Probably misjudging the situation, Maurice repeatedly ordered his troops to start a new offensive rather than return to winter quarters. His troops gained the impression that Maurice no longer understood the military situation and proclaimed Phocas their leader. They demanded that Maurice abdicate and proclaim as successor either his son Theodosius or General Germanus. Both men were accused of treason. As riots broke out in Constantinople, the emperor, taking his family with him, left the city on a warship heading to Nicomedia. Theodosius was put ashore with direction to seek support from the Persians, but apparently never reached his destination. Phocas entered Constantinople in November and was crowned emperor. His troops captured Maurice and his remaining family, and brought them to the Harbor of Eutropius at Chalcedon. 
Maurice was murdered at the harbor of Eutropius on 27 November 602. The deposed emperor was forced to watch his five younger sons executed before he was beheaded himself.
Heraclitus sailed from the Exarch of Carthage to Thessalonica, where he collected men and further ships and, in the summer of 610, set off for Constantinople.
On Sunday 5 October this formidable force advanced through the Mamara to the Golden Horn. Heraclius had been secretly assured that he would be welcomed in the city as its deliverer, and the information proved correct. Two days later the captive Emperor was rowed out to his ship.
‘Is it thus’ asked Heraclitus, ‘that you have governed the Empire?’
‘Will you,’ replied Phocas, with unexpected spirit, ‘govern it any better?’
It was a good question, but it was hardly calculated to incline Heraclius toward clemency. Phocas, his henchmen and cronies were all executed on the spot. That afternoon, in the Great Palace, Heraclius underwent two separate, though near simultaneous, religious ceremonies. First he married his wife, formerly known as Fabia, now changed her name to Eudocia. Immediately afterwards, he was crowned Emperor.
Now about thirty-six, fair-haired and broad-chested, Heraclius must have appeared something of a demi-god when he stepped out of the palace, his young wife on his arm.
His political position strengthened by a patched up agreement with the Avars, by the spring of 622 Heraclius was ready for his Persian War. On Easter Monday he boarded his flagship – the first European since Theodosius the Great to lead his forces in to battle – and headed down the Ionian coast to Rhodes, then east along the southern shore of Anatolia to Issus, where Alexander had routed the Persians nearly a century before. Here he spent the summer in an intensive programme of tactical training, testing his own generalship and building up the stamina of his men. Only as autumn approached did he begin his advance to the north, and it was somewhere in the Cappadocian highlands that the two armies came face to face. Heraclius had never commanded an army in the field, but the Persians under their foremost general, Shahr-Baraz, were put to flight. Heraclius then returned to Constantinople, leaving his army to pass the winter in Pontus. This time there was no protests from his men. They were, after all, soldiers of the Cross – and victorious ones at that.
Back again the following spring – this time with Martina – Heraclius advanced through Armenia and Azerbaijan to the Great King’s magnificent palace at Ganzak, which he destroyed. Then, leaving a trail of burning cities behind him, he headed for the Persian capitol at Ctesiphon. Cut off by Shahr-Baraz, he withdrew for the next winter to the western shore of the Caspian, where Martina was safely delivered of a child. Another summer of campaigning, another winter, this time on Lake Van, and then, on 1 March 625, the Emperor led his men away on the longest and hardest journey that they had yet undertaken, first through the foothills of Ararat, then 200 miles along the Arsanias river to Maryopolis and Amida, both of which he captured. Thence it was only another seventy-odd miles to the Euphrates, which he reached without, as yet, a glimpse of the enemy. Finally, just to the north of Adanta, he found the Persian army drawn up on the opposite bank ready for battle. There was, as it happened, a modest bridge nearby and the Byzantines, despite the fatigues of their long march, immediately flung themselves into the attack; but Shahr-Baraz, feigning retreat, led them into a carefully prepared ambush. Within minutes, the vanguard of the Emperor’s army was shattered. The Persians, however, had allowed their attention to become distracted from the bridge; Heraclius spurred his horse forward and charged across, his rearguard close behind him, oblivious to the hail of Persian arrows. Not even Shahr-Baraz could conceal his admiration: ‘See your Emperor!’ he is said to have exclaimed to a renegade Greek. ‘He fears these arrows and spears no more than would an anvil!’
Early in 627 Heraclius decided to march on the palace of the Great King himself – at Dastagird, near Ctesiphon. He moved with caution; a Persian army was not far away. But that too was biding its time. Its new commander, Razates, was determined not to meet Heraclius until he was ready. Only at the very end of the year, by the ruins of Nineveh, was the battle joined. It continued for eleven hours without a break. At its height, Razates suddenly challenged Heraclius to single combat. The Emperor accepted, spurred on his charger and, we are told, struck off the general’s head with a single thrust. He himself was wounded more than once, but refused to sheathe his sword. Only when the sun set did the Greeks realize that there was virtually no enemy left to oppose them.
Heraclius arrived at Dastagird to find the Great King fled, his sumptuous palace deserted. The Byzantines showed no mercy, committing it, and everything within it, to the flames. From his refuge at Suziana, Khosrow now called on his subjects to rally to the defence of Ctesphion. But the Perisans had lost patience with their King, and for Heraclius, there was no purpose in overthrowing a ruler whose subjects were obviously about to do it themselves. A week or two later he and his army headed for home. Khosrow, meanwhile, was flung into prison by his son Siroes, being allowed only as much bread and water as would keep him alive and so prolong his agony. On the fifth day he was shot slowly to death with arrows. The news reached Heraclius at Tabriz. There followed a treaty of peace, whereby the Persians surrendered all their conquered territories and their captives, together with the True Cross and the other relics of the Passion.