On 13 January 532, as the Emperor took his place in the Hippodrome and gave the signal for the games to begin, his appearance was greeted by uproar. Suddenly, he realized that, for the first time, the Greens and the Blues were united; and that their clamour was directed not at each other but at him. ‘Nika! Nika!’ they cried, using the normal word of encouragement – ‘Win! Win!’ – by which they cheered on the charioteers. In the past, however, each side had tried to shout down the other. Now they were speaking with one voice; and that voice was not pleasant to hear.
The races were soon abandoned. The mob poured out of the great circus, hell bent on destruction. Their first objective was the palace of the Ciry Prefect, where they released all the prisoners before setting fire to the building. From there they passed on to the Praetorian Prefecture, then to the Senate House and even to the two Great Churches of St Eirene and St Sophia, leaving a trail of flame behind them. By the end of the day all these buildings and countless others had been reduced to ruins. For five days and nights the smoke lay thick over the city On the second day the mob, returning to the Hippodrome, called for the immediate dismissal of John of Cappadocia, Tribonian and the City Prefect Eudaimon – a demand which Justinian, by now seriously alarmed, granted at once. By now too, the rioters had found a new favourite. Hypatius, an elderly nephew of the former Emperor, had done his best to hide when the mob began calling his name; but they ran him to earth and carried him shoulder-high to the Hippodrome, where he was crowned with a bystander’s gold necklet and seated on the throne. Meanwhile, in the palace behind, a desperate Justinian was conferring with his advisers. He had already ordered preparations to be made for himself and his court to flee the capitol if need arose, and he now agreed that that moment could no longer be delayed. Suddenly, Theodora intervened. The possibility of flight was not to be considered for a moment. ‘Every man’, she continued,
‘who is born in to the light of day must sooner or later die; and how could an Emperor ever allow himself to be a fugitive? May I myself never willingly shed my imperial robes, nor see the day when I am no longer addressed by my title. If you, my Lord, wish to save your skin, you will have no difficulty in doing so. As for me, I stand by the ancient saying: the purple is the noblest winding-sheet.’
After that, there could be no question of departure; the crisis, it was agreed, must be resolved by the force of arms. Fortunately, two of the Empire’s best generals were present at the palace. The first, a Romanized Thracian named Bellisarius, was still in his twenties. The second, Mundus, was an Illyrian who happened to have with him a sizeable force of Scandinavian mercenaries. Secretly, the two slipped out of the place, rallied their soldiers and, by separate routes, marched on the Hippodrome. Then they burst in simultaneously on the mob, taking it completely by surprise. No quarter was given; Greens and Blues were slaughtered indiscriminately. Meanwhile the commander of the imperial bodyguard, a deceptively frail looking Armenian eunuch named Narses, had stationed his men at the principal exits with orders to cut down all who tried to escape. Within a few minutes, the angry shouts in the grant ampitheatre had given place to the cries and groans of the wounded and dying men; soon these too grew quiet. As the mercenaries picked their way among the 30,000 bodies relieving them of such valuables as they possessed, the trembling Hypatius was led before the Emperor. Justinian was inclined to be merciful; but Theodora stopped him. The man, she pointed out, had been crowned by the people; he might at any time serve as a focus for further rebellion. Her husband, as always, bowed to her will. On the very next day Hypatius and his brother were summarily executed and their bodies cast into the sea.