Then, since he had encountered a temporary delay in returning to his kingdom, Chosroes tried to approach the Roman emperor. Now Maurice, when he realized Chosroes' objective, prevented him by a royal letter from coming to his presence, without regard for reputation but effecting for Chosroes the advancement of his interests: for he considered that Chosroes must not travel far from the Persian state, lest Baram might thereby establish his tyrannical enterprise more firmly. 
At the start of spring Chosroes sent ambassadors to the emperor; and so on the third day the emperor convened a royal assembly and received the open homage of the ambassadors. Then, when silence pervaded the meeting and the emperor had granted the Persians permission to deliver a speech, the most distinguished of the ambassadors, giving his speech a preliminary enrichment of tears and thereby trying to capture the emperor's pity, began with these words:
`Thrice-greatest king, if the request were from your closest friends, the occasion would possess propriety, the manner eloquence, the argument persuasion, the suffering mercy, the theme its justification, the necessity swift arrival of assistance, the embassy respect  and, in a word, the sufferings would possess pity to match even the disasters with which they were identified. 
But since all these things, along with everything else, have escaped Persia's grasp, it remains either for Chosroes to be bathed in benevolence through your virtue or for the Medes to destroy a great kingdom by tyranny. 
I am well aware that one of those not initiated into the rites of good sense might say that it would benefit the Roman state for our Babylonian nation to lament long in perdition after casting aside its kingdom, power, and great strength, and for Roman power to wax fat in unmolested peace; he would be ill informed about what is disadvantageous to Roman might. 
For it is impossible for a single monarchy to embrace the innumerable cares of the organization of the universe, and with one mind's rudder to direct a creation as great as that over which the sun watches. 
For it is never possible for the earth to resemble the unity of the divine and primary rule, and to obtain a disposition corresponding to that of the upper order, since it is steered hither and thither towards the breakers by mankind, whose nature is unstable and whose judgement most worthless because of its tendency towards evil.
`Therefore, even though the Persians were to be deprived of power, their power would immediately transfer to other men. For events will not tolerate lack of leadership, nor such great fortune lack of direction. For as thought will not be separated from reasoning, so the greatest powers in the world will never be, as it were, bereft of a helmsman. 
Or did not the Medes possess prosperous Chaldaea after the Babylonians, the Persians after the Medes, and after these the Parthians, as if by some succession of inheritance? It is obvious to shepherds and goatherds alike that the whole flock does not act at a single pipe blowing a pastoral tune. Something similar is accustomed to happen in human affairs as well. 
Sufficient proof is the insane, unreasonable ambition of a Macedonian stripling: for Alexander became an immature sport of fortune and, when she smiled on him a little in mockery, he swaggered in his mastery of Europe, undertook to master the sea, desired to hold the sceptre of Babylon, yearned for Indian power, threatened to subjugate Libya, and constrained his kingdom to expand as far as the sky is spread and the sun's eye shines with sparkling rays. 
He attempted to subjugate the temporal universe to a single unitary power. But, sooner than this, ambition was quenched along with power, and affairs proceeded once more divided up into a leadership of multiple tyranny, so to speak. For concord has never come to unite the inharmonious.
`Accordingly, what prosperity would events devolve upon the Romans if the Persians are deprived of power and transmit mastery to another nation? What mark of honour would the Roman race acquire if it rejects as suppliant a king who is the most famous and brave of all on earth? 
Or what citadel of piety will you have if you have despised the unfortunate? When, O king, will you ever take up the contest on behalf of justice and mobilize for war if you forgo this opening? When will the beauty of worship ever blossom for you if not at the present opportunity? Now you may either confirm your title by your actions, or by your misdeeds acquire falsehood for your appellation. 
What more kingly display than this will you make during the whole period of your rule? What other such occasion for exultation could be available for the Romans? What guarantee of your fairness, O king, will be more respected among the nations than this? 
Now through a brief alliance you will derive eternal peace, and what the Romans have utterly failed to accomplish by innumerable conflicts, unbounded cares, and a flood of financial outlay, this you will now carry off effortlessly through a virtuous spirit, which the occasion demands but the king disposes, and you will pluck a trouble-free peace without toil. What could be more advantageous to the Romans than this? 
Let not any of Hormisdas' wickedness dwell in your heart. He has learned from his sufferings not to abominate peace. Chosroes has not inherited his father's misdeeds: sons do not inherit their father's inclinations in their entirety along with his possessions. 
Hormisdas was ill disposed, Chosroes is now well disposed; he carries round your benefaction incarnate in his person, which he will be ashamed to forget since he has numerous witnesses to your piety.
`Do not let usurpers prevail, lest you should share the precedent. Or is not evil the masses' great ambition, is not human nature disposed to desire the worse, its impulse hard to redirect towards the better? 
We have heard that the usurper has also dispatched ambassadors to you, demanding to have as accomplice in crime the man who has done no wrong, and all but contriving that a ruler join in revolution with a fugitive. What could be more inglorious and abominable to the Romans than this? 
What foundation of loyalty to you will he use to underpin his promises, that man whose premise is one of utmost ingratitude, who has organized a contingent against his benefactors, and embraced every form of evil in order to depose from his kingdom a ruler who has done nothing wrong? A premise of evil does not usually protect a promise of friendship. 
An imprudent beginning will also have a totally inexpedient conclusion: for the sprout does not progress in contradiction to the seed. Baram may perhaps attempt to angle for injustice with gifts; but I have heard it said by one of your nation, who is wise in subtleties, that from wicked men ''gifts are no gifts and are not beneficial".
The wages of debauchery are unable to bring a harvest of enjoyment, and the profits of crime to possess an unrepented crop growing in the furrows: for before pleasure there is pain, and before gratification a diversion to grief, since fine objectives have been surrendered and even righteous acquisitions are removed in addition.
`In exchange we give back Martyropolis, we will offer Daras as a gift, without payment we will lay war in the tomb and build a house of peace by bidding farewell to Armenia, on whose account war ill-fatedly gained free rein among men. 
Even if the gifts do not befit the necessity, still this is our highest principle, to exercise moderation in promises rather than to grease the ears with great offers and incur undying enmity when we fail to accomplish their realization, wickedly storing up against the future health of peace great occasions for evil. 
I have made sufficient defence of the profitable course for Romans and Persians. But if I have disregarded any element of a more complete treatment, then, O king, supply the omission: for it often happens that reason abandons the contest, since necessity is incapable of tolerating discipline or obeying the dictates of reflection when concomitant circumstances are constantly ferrying the mind back and forth in confusion.'
When the ambassadors had thus completed this discourse and their request won persuasion and favour from the fluency of the speech, the senate and emperor decreed that the Romans would help Chosroes.
