The emperor selected a hundred thousand of his troops, all fine men ready for battle, and these he assigned to Khosrow Parviz, together with armor, cash, and warhorses. In this way the king’s long wait came to an end. The emperor had a daughter named Maryam, who was a wise, dignified, and intelligent young woman. He affianced her to Khosrow, with the rites of his religion, calling down God’s blessing on her. Gostahm received her from the emperor, and with all due ceremony he handed her over to Khosrow. The emperor presented them with such a dowry that the splendid horses carrying it were exhausted by the weight. There were gold vessels and imperial jewels, rubies, and clothes embroidered with gold-worked designs, carpets, and Byzantine silk brocades bearing figures woven in gold. There were also bracelets, torques and earrings, and three splendid crowns encrusted with jewels. Four golden litters were prepared, their facings studded with gems, as well as forty closed couches of ebony, glittering with gems like a rooster’s eyes. Following them came serving girls as lovely as the moon, and five hundred young male servants mounted on horses with trappings of gold and silver. Then there were forty handsome, charming Byzantine eunuchs, together with four wise and famous philosophers; to these last the king told everything that was necessary. He also spoke with Maryam in secret, advising her on obedience and her duties, on when she should be generous, on her food, and on what behavior was appropriate. When the gifts were reckoned up their value was estimated at more than three hundred million dinars.
The emperor consulted with astrologers as to when would be the best time for the journey and set off on an auspicious day. After two stages of the journey he gave orders that Maryam come to him, and he spoke with her at length. He said, “Keep yourself secluded, and do not loosen your belt until you reach the Persian border; Khosrow must not see you naked before then, since this could lead to unforeseen consequences.” He then bade her an affectionate farewell. To his brother Niatus, who was in charge of the Byzantine troops sent to Khosrow, he said, “Maryam is of your own blood, and so I have entrusted her to you. I am giving my daughter, my wealth, and a well-equipped army into your safekeeping.” Niatus accepted the charge, and when he and the king had spoken together, he wept as they turned aside from one another. Niatus, bearing his sword and mace, marched at the head of the army. Khosrow heard of their approach and set out from the town where he was waiting. As the dust sent up by the approaching troops became visible, followed by their banners and their splendid armored cavalry bearing down toward him like the wind, Khosrow laughed from his heart, as a flower blossoms in the spring. His spirits lifted and he dug his heels into his horse’s flanks. He saw Niatus and embraced him, questioning him at length about the emperor who had gone to such trouble on his behalf and offered him so much wealth. Then he went over to the litter, where he saw Maryam and glimpsed her face beneath her veil; he questioned her too, and kissed her hand, rejoicing in his heart to see her beauty. Khosrow brought the army to his royal pavilion, where he had a private chamber prepared for Maryam. He sat talking with her for three days, and on the fourth, as the sun lit up the world, he had a splendid tent prepared, and there he summoned Niatus and his subordinates Sergius and Kut, as well as the other Byzantine commanders. He asked them, “Who are your leaders, your finest warriors?” Niatus chose seventy men to lead the attack on the day of battle, and each of them had a thousand picked cavalry following his banner. When Khosrow saw this fine force of cavalry all eager for war, he praised God who has created time and the world, and called down his blessings on Niatus and the army, as well as on the emperor and his country. To the commanders he said, “If God is with me in this battle, I shall show my mettle, and make the earth as splendid as the Pleiades. May our thoughts now be only of friendship; the heavens are with us, and the kindness of noble men is as an orchard for us to rest in.”

One day Parviz decided to go hunting, and the expedition was arranged as had been customary with former kings. Three hundred horses with golden bridles were led out; there were one thousand six hundred loyal footmen carrying javelins, and one thousand four hundred more who carried staves and swords and wore brocade beneath their armor. Following them came five hundred falconers, with sparrow hawks, merlins, and falcons, and then three hundred horsemen leading cheetahs. There were also leopards and lions, whose mouths had been muzzled with gold chains, and a hundred dogs with golden leashes, for running down deer. After them came two thousand musicians, all mounted on camels and wearing golden crowns; they had prepared songs to celebrate the hunt. There were thrones, tents, and pavilions, loaded on camels, as well as stalls for the animals. There were two hundred slaves with censers that burned aloes wood and ambergris, together with two hundred young servants carrying narcissi and crocuses, and they carried these so that the wind bore their scent to Parviz. In front of them went men who scattered water in which musk had been mixed, so that the wind would not suddenly stir up the dust and disturb the king. When Maryam heard that this entourage was approaching, with the king at its head, she put on a golden dress scented with musk, and over it a surcoat of red Byzantine brocade with a gold ground worked with jewels. She made her cheeks the color of pomegranates, and on her head she placed a crown of imperial splendor. She went up from her royal chamber onto the roof of her palace, and the days of her youth brought her no pleasure. She waited there, with the tears trickling down her cheeks, until Khosrow Parviz approached. When she saw the king’s face she stood so that he could see her, and she spoke gently to him about their former days; her eyes were like narcissi that droop with sorrow, and they bathed her cheeks’ rosy color as she wept. Beautiful, and in tears, she reproachfully addressed the king:

“My lord, my warrior, my king, who lives
Favored by all that heaven’s fortune gives, 
Where is your love now? Or your tears that I, 
And I alone, could comfort once and dry? 
Where are the endless nights we turned to day 
With tears, and smiles, and amorous sweet play? 
Where are our oaths and promises, and where 
Are all the vows we vowed we’d always share?” 

And as she spoke her tears fell onto her imperial clothes. Tears welled too in Khosrow’s eyes, and his face turned as yellow as the sun. He sent a horse with a golden bridle for her, and forty reliable Byzantine servants, to accompany her to the golden, bejeweled apartments of his harem.

