The Persian nation is wicked, dissembling, and servile, but at the same time patriotic and obedient. The Persians obey their rulers out of fear, and the result is that they are steadfast in enduring hard work and warfare on behalf of their fatherland. For the most part they prefer to achieve their results by planning and generalship; they stress an orderly approach rather than a brave and impulsive one. Since they have been brought up in a hot climate, they easily bear the hardships of heat, thirst, and lack of food. They are formidable when laying siege, but even more formidable when besieged. They are extremely skillful in concealing their injuries and coping bravely with adverse circumstances, even turning them to their own advantage. They are intractable in negotiations. They will not initiate any proposal, even one they regard as vitally important for themselves, but will wait until the proposal is made by their opponents.
They wear body armor and mail, and are armed with bows and swords. They are more practiced in rapid, although not powerful archery, than all other warlike nations. Going to war, they encamp within fortifications. When the time of battle draws near they surround themselves with a ditch and a sharpened palisade. They do not leave the baggage train within, but make a ditch for the purpose of refuge in case of a reverse in battle. They do not allow their horses to graze, but gather the forage by hand.
Before the day of battle a favorite ploy of theirs is to camp in rugged country and to postpone the fighting, especially when they know their opponents are well prepared and ready for combat. When it does come to battle, moreover, especially during the summer, they make their attack at the hottest hour of the day. They hope that the heat of the sun and the delay in beginning the action will dampen the courage and spirit of their adversaries. They then join battle with calmness and determination, marching step by step in even and dense formation. They are really bothered by cold weather, rain, and the south wind, all of which loosen their bow strings.
